# Git 101

This document is a guide to setting up full fat vanilla Git. A base installation of Git is the most robust and consistent approach to source code management and version control.

> [!NOTE] Alternative implementations
>
> [GitHub Desktop](https://desktop.github.com/download/) is one way of installing a striped down and intuitive version of Git with streamlined GitHub authorisation. However, it is recommended that team members install the full version of `git` for completeness and consistency. With a full installation of `git` you can access the full set of tools and configurations. A default installation can be picked up by any third party application.
>
> [GitHub CLI](https://cli.github.com/) is a bit like GitHub Desktop but with more features and is used via the terminal. For more see [Git & GitHub](git&github.md).

## Installation

### Windows

> [!WARNING]
> Elevated (admin) priviliges required to install `git`

1. Via GUI installer from [git-scm.com](https://git-scm.com/downloads/win)
2. Command line

```powershell
# with winget
winget install --id Git.Git -e --source winget

# with chocolatey
choco install git.install
```

<details>
<summary>macOS & Linux</summary>

### macOS

> [!NOTE]
> macOS is packaged with `git` out of the box. However, it is recommended to install the most recent release alongside the deault version.

```zsh
# with homebrew
brew install git
```

### Linux

```bash
# with your distro's package manager
sudo apt-get install git
sudo dnf install git
```

</details>

## Configuration

### Reset config

Git can be configured in three locations and is used according to a heirachy.

`Local (repo-level) > Global (user-level) > System (system-level)`

Git looks for `.gitconfig` inside the current repo, then it looks for the global config, then system.

If you are unsure about how you installed and configured `git` previously then it might be worthwhile resetting all your configuration to ensure nothing is clashing and starting fresh. Config will persist between upgrades.

1. In a new terminal window (i.e. `powershell`, `bash`, `zsh`) run the reset commands for each scope.
2. Confirm config is reset by listing all from each scope.

```cli
# reset
git config unset --all

# confirm reset
git config list
```

### New config

#### User

> [!NOTE]
> This name and email is [embedded on each commit](https://docs.github.com/en/account-and-profile/how-tos/setting-up-and-managing-your-personal-account-on-github/managing-email-preferences/setting-your-commit-email-address#setting-your-commit-email-address-in-git), including on GitHub. You may want to obfuscate your email using the [GitHub noreply email for your account](https://docs.github.com/en/account-and-profile/reference/email-addresses-reference#your-noreply-email-address)

```cli
git config --global user.name "Your Name"
git config --global user.email "your.email@domain.com"
```

#### Default branch

To match GitHub default.

```cli
git config --global init.defaultBranch main
```

#### Line endings

Windows and macOS/Linux use different invisible characters to indicate line endings (`CRLF` and `LF` respectively) <https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/git-basics/configuring-git-to-handle-line-endings>. Git can be configured so local files behave natively but commits stay consistent, preventing unnecessary code churn during cross-platform development. Basically: store code in `LF` to ensure compatibility with most runtimes.

```cli
# Windows: local files use CRLF, commits use LF
git config --global core.autocrlf true

# macOS/Linux: local files stay LF, commits use LF
git config --global core.autocrlf input
```

If your repo uses a `.gitattributes` file, that file takes precedence and should be treated as the source of truth.

## Connect to GitHub

Next: [Connect to GitHub](git&github.md)
